#alain-fournier

the whole morning is mine, to explore the outskirts of the wood, the coolest, most hidden place thereabouts, while my big brother is also away on a journey of discover. it is like a dried-up riverbed. i am walking beneath the low branches of trees that i do not know by name; they must be elms. just now,  i jumped over a stile at the end of the path and here i am, in this broad avenue of green grass flowing beneath the leaves, brushing through the nettles in places and knocking down the tall stalks of valerian. sometimes, for a few steps, my feet are resting on a bank of fine sand. and in the silence, i can hear a bird: i think it's a nightingale, but i must be wrong because they only sing in the evenings... this bird is relentlessly repeating the same phrase: voice of the morning, a recital in the shade, a delicious invitation to a journey between the elms. invisible and obstinate, it seems to be accompanying me through the leaves. for the first time, i too am on the road to adventure. no longer am i hunting for shells washed up by the sea under monsieur seurel's guidance, or wild orchids that even the old schoolmaster does not recognise, or even, as often happened in old martin's field, the deeply sunk, dried up spring covered by a grating and buried over so many weeds that every time we would take longer finding it... i am looking for something still more mysterious. i'm looking for the passage that they write about in books, the one with the entrance that the prince, weary with travelling, cannot find. this is the one you find at the remotest hour of the morning, long after you have forgotten that eleven o'clock is coming, or midday. and suddenly, as you part the branches in the dense undergrowth, with that hesitant movement of the hands, held unevenly at face height, you see something like a long, dark avenue leading to a tiny circle of light...