Doomsday Parade

What about the future? What about the generations of people to come? What about the things that we destroy in the name of profits? Ensuring today that there is a future for the world to come. How about the people in the world that are starving because multinational/transnational corporations think there are excess numbers of people in the world? How about Capital versus Labor which is money versus those who have nothing. How about them taking your life, now they get rid of you, bringing you into extinction by creating viruses in laboratories, turning them loose, by selling death, destruction, and disaster by importing drugs into the country so people are asleep. How about the major pharmaceutical companies that are selling you drugs so you never wake up and see the truth. How about staying on Prozac and Zoloft so you never look around you and know that something is wrong. They manufacture the misery people feel today. There is nothing different with man than in the past, you're no more intelligent. You get fed information by the terabyte yet knowledge is minimal. We have people who are miseducated, misinformed, that seem to not know the truth. They go around life everyday so concerned with gathering up a few dollars, see nothing around them, not caring about anything whatsoever. All they want to do is work for forty years, for their little job, forty hours a week to retire on 40% of what they were earning. They think this is living. They never lived a day in their lives. Never knowing that there is enough for everyone in the world and if people would stop stealing from each other, thinking they can h\*\*\*d something and hold it. All that you acquire on this planet, it's nothing. It doesn't go with you, you have no pockets on your soul, you take nothing off this planet. When you leave here, who did you help and what difference did you make in the world? Did you better the world by your life and your presence and existence here? If you haven't, what kind of a person were you? What kind of citizen of the world are you? There is no thing such as a flag, or a symbol, or a nation. Armies only serve to kill other people and steal their resources. It's been this way since recorded history of mankind and before.

#suffering #the-lived-experience #mortality #conscientiousness 