#isabella-tree

We lost more ancient woods - tens of thousands of them - in the forty years after the Second World War than is the previous four hundred. Between the beginning of the war and the 1990s we lost 75,000 miles of hedgerows. Up to 90 per cent of wetland has disappeared in England alone since the Industrial Revolution. 80 per cent of Britain's lowland heathland has been lost since 1800; a quarter of the acreage in the last 50 years. 97 per cent of our wildflower meadows have been lost since the war. This is a story of unremitting unification and simplification, reducing the landscape to a large-scale patchwork of ryegrass, oilseed rape and cereals, with scattered, undermanaged woods and remnant hedgerows the only remaining refuge for many species of wildflowers, insects and songbirds.

Underfunded and unprioritized, conservation measures have failed to hold ground against agricultural intensification and development. Ironically, England, which boasts one of the greatest traditions of recording its wildlife and has the largest membership of wildlife-protection organizations in Europe, has among the smallest amount of land nationally protected as nature reserves. Compared to 2.75 million hectares in France, England has only 94,400 hectares (364 square miles, less than 1 per cent of its land area). Even Estonia manages over 258,000 hectares.

The transformation of our countryside has impacted not just on turtle doves but on birds in general. In 1966, according to the RSPB, there were 40 million more birds in the UK than there are today. Our skies have emptied.

In 1970 we had 20 million pairs of what are known as 'farmland birds', such as quails, lapwings, grey partridges, corn buntings, linnets, yellowhammers, skylarks, tree sparrows and turtle doves - most of them songbirds that depend on insects for their chicks and copses or hedgerows for their nests. By 1990 we had lost half of them. By 2010 that number had halved again. It is hard to countenance figures of this magnitude.

Familiar, conspicuous in our skies and in our landscape, birds are, in a very real sense, our canaries in the mine - casualties connected to far greater and less visible losses.

Using the 'biodiversity intactness index' - a new system that measure the condition of a country's biodiversity - the updated 2016 State of Nature report discovered that the UK has lost significantly more biodiversity over the long term than the world average. Ranked twenty-ninth lowest out of 218 countries, we are among the most nature depleted countries in the world.

The key to Knepp's success, conservationists are beginning to realize, is its focus on 'self-willed ecological processes'. Rewilding is restoring by letting go, allowing nature to take the driving seat. In contrast, conventional conservation in Britain tends to be about targets and control, doing everything humanly possible to preserve the status quo, sometimes to maintain the overall look of a landscape of, more often, to micro-manage a particular habitat for the perceived benefit of several chosen species, or just a single, favoured one.

Allowing natural processes to happen, and having no pre-defined targets to meet, no species or numbers to dictate the plan, is a challenge to conventional thinking. It particularly unsettles scientists who like to test hypotheses, run computer models, tick boxes and fix goals. Rewilding - giving nature the space and opportunity to express itself - is largely a leap of faith. It involves surrendering all preconceptions, and simply sitting back and seeing what happens. 

Oliver Rackham, Woodlands, 2006: "A single 400-year-old-oak ... [is] a whole ecosystem of such creatures for which ten thousand 200-year-old-oaks are no use at all."
#ageing 

With oxygen available in soil only relatively close to the surface, the majority of a tree's roots are found in the top twelve inches and are therefore vulnerable to ploughing and compaction. Our dairy cows, weighing half a ton each, congregating en masse in the shade on a summer's dat - a pastoral idyll, so we had thought - were doing the roots no favours, an the repeated ploughing an the traffic of heavy combines, power harrows and seed drills directly under the oaks and further into the field were constantly assailing their roots.

Mycorrhizae, from the Greek *mikas-riza* (literally "fungus root"), relate symbiotically to plants. The fine fungal filaments extend from the roots of plants to supply their hosts with water and essential nutrients. The plants, in return, provide the mycorrhizal fungi with carbohydrates they need for growth. At a hundredth of a milimetre in diameter - ten times finer than the finest root - these filaments, or "hyphae", are invisible to the naked eye. A single filament may extend hundreds or thousands of times the length of one tree root. Mycorrhizal partnerships can be highly specific, Ted told us, associating only with an individual plant of species. They can also be generalist and promiscuous, creating vast community structures, known as common mycelial networks. These networks can be indefinitely huge, spanning - some believe - entire continents.

A single bluebell, for example, may be colonized by eleven or more species of mycorrhizal fungi, most of which have no yet been scientifically described. Without them, a bluebell, with its short, thick roots, growing in soils where phosphate is typically available at less than 1 part per 10 million, would die. The same is true for trees. One study in North America discovered over a hundred species of mycorrhizal fungi associated with a single tree. Using an arsenal of biochemicals unique to fungi, mycorrhizae can even mine rock, extracting minerals and bringing them into the plant food cycle.

As Canadian forest ecologist Suzanne Simard discovered in the late 1990s, and Peter Wohlleben describes in his remarkable book *The Hidden Life of Trees - what they feel, how they communicate* (2015), this underworld system of molecular signalling reveals a world where trees are responsive and sociable creatures, much more like us than we ever imagined.

To Ted, the loss of ancient open-grown oaks from Britain is an unacknowledged catastrophe. Britain's ancient Druids worshipped in groves of oaks, and our first kings adorned themselves with coronets of oak leaves. No tree, to his mind, is more closely entwined with our culture.

As the crown retracts, whether through age or stress, its outer limbs die back and eventually fall to the ground, providing an energy boost to the roots. Drag them away, as we used to, and the ageing tree is deprived of an important source of nutrients.

"What we've shown in the Oostvaardersplassen is that a mix of herbivores, allowed to express themselves freely, without human control, simulates a much greater variety of animal and plant species than can be found on the short grassland characteristic of seasonal farmland grazing."

The idea of constructing a computer model to identify the outcomes of self-willed land seemed like trying to predict the lifetime achievements of an unborn child.
#fate-and-fortune #predictability #humans-and-machines 

But the world of academia is a strange, sometimes counterproductive and often sluggish place. Where one might expect it to be open and responsive to new thinking, it can be oddly conservative and resistant to radical ideas.

It was clear it was going to take time for the academics to recalibrate and acknowledge mistakes, let alone embrace an entirely different paradigm. As the old saying goes: "Science advances, one funeral at a time."

There have been dung beetles on the planet for 30 million years. They exist on every continent except Antarctica and specialize in every form of animal dung there is, though the majority prefer the plant material contained in the dung of herbivores. Dosing livestock and pets with parasiticides that pass into their excrement, killing any insect that eats it, including dung beetles, is one of the most serious problems affecting our soils. The process of a dung beetle's tunnelling, eating and digesting adds organic matter, increases soil fertility, aeration and structure, and improves rainwater filtration and the quality of groundwater run-off. Ironically, by eating the parasites harboured in the dung and by swiftly processing the dung itself, dung beetles also reduce the transmission of parasites and hence the need for chemical livestock wormers. Only now, when several of our dung beetle species are on the verge of extinction, are farmers beginning to appreciate their value. Dung beetles are estimated to save the British cattle industry £367 million a year simply by encouraging the growth of healthy grass.

Scrub doesn't stand still. The more you cut it down, the more prolific it becomes. Even defining it is difficult and mapping it is virtually impossible. Where does it begin - at the margins, with grassland, bare ground and marshy spaces, with bracken, reeds and low-lying bramble, or with the shrubs themselves? Where does it end - when the nascent trees are taller than the shrubs, or as the understory in closed-canopy woodland? Is - endlessly morphing, on its way to being something else - a discomforting notion for the modern mind.

Conservation groups like Buglife find themselves in the bizarre position of petitioning for the preservation of post-industrial areas for wildlife while our so-called greenfield sites, supposedly protected from development, have close to no wildlife value at all. Brown is the new green.

Even honeysuckle (which provides the nest material for dormice, and is the favoured plant of white admiral butterflies) was, until well after the Second World War, rooted out as an undesirable weed.

Once, untidy margins were tolerated, even encouraged. Now, armed with motorized tools, we have become a nation obsessed with orderliness and boundaries. Systems of rotational growth that mimic nature's cycles of boom and bust have been replaced by a landscape that appears, within a human lifespan at least, unchanging. A patchwork of neatly hedged fields dotted with mature trees and small copses, frames by bare, rolling hills and slow-flowing rivers has become the archetype of England's green and pleasant land. It is etched in our subconscious, the bar-code of stability, prosperity, control. Rooted in this idyll is our notion of mankind, subjugator of wilderness, bending nature to our sway.

Almost all (97 per cent) of global soy production is used for animal feed, and European imports of soymeal increased almost 3 million tonnes in the two years following the 2003 pigswill ban.

Though we protest that we love nature it seems that this is only on our own terms. We have become a nation of gardeners, more interested in exotic flowers than natives. Plantlife, the environmental organization that seeks to safeguard our wild vegetation, has a membership of 10,500. The Royal Horticultural Society has 434,000.

Each generation, Pauly realized, redefines what is 'natural'. Each time the baseline drops it is considered the new normal.

While we merrily ring our houses with gardens full of exotics, the countryside is considered a place apart. If a plant escapes into the wilder landscape from a park, garden or arboretum, it is suddenly undesirable. At our own back door the exotic is in neutral territory, like an illegal immigrant camping out in an airport. One of the underlying problems is confusion about our own role in introductions. Human agency usually identifies a species as alien. It is interesting how, in delegitimizing or denying ourselves a role as vectors for other species - be it intentional or unintentional - we exclude ourselves from the rest of the animal kingdom. Only not all humans are considered this way. Introductions made by pre-technological, pre-European societies, however advanced and whatever they may have got up to, are generally considered legitimate. Even tribal communities living today are considered exempt from the finger of blame, no matter that they, too, may travel and trade over great distances. But if anyone touched by modernity -anyone akin to those deciding the labels of 'native' and 'non-native' - introduces a new species, well, that is illegitimate.

There is confusion, too, over the degree to which introduced plants and animals upset the ecological status quo. The tabloids revel in headlines about invasions and attacks and aliens taking over the world. But scientists increasingly argue that the impact of non-natives is vastly exaggerated and largely a matter of perception.

It is often assumed that a new species will inevitably take over the niche of another. But ecosystems, even on islands, do not necessarily work this way. The space may not be 'full', the niche may be new. New arrivals may simply add to the diversity. The picture, too, is often blurred by other causes of ecosystem change. Are exotics responsible, or are they merely taking advantage of instabilities caused by pollution, climate change and habitat degradation?

But few people today are familiar with the exquisite unease of a nightingale's song. Like the turtle dove, it is now almost a miracle to hear one. Between 1967 and 2007 the number of nightingales in the UK fell 91 per cent. For every ten that were singing when I was a child, there is now only one. This isn't supposed to have happened.

One of British conservation's most conspicuous failures in the twentieth century has been to concentrate on individual species to the neglect of ecosystems.
#systems-thinking 

A substantial volume of relevant policy may now be in place, the words may be there, the sentiment ripe. But lack of political will, lack of funding and lack of integration between government sectors and policy-makers continues to scupper implementation. Nature remains on a losing wicket, undefended against growing cumulative pressure from the more powerful lobbies of intensive agriculture, fisheries, forestry and urban development.

The human brain is half fat, and one quarter of that fat is made up of omega-3. Since the body cannot make its own omega-3, it has to derive it from food, but there are very few foods that contain it. Oily fish like tuna, mackerel and salmon have high levels of omega-3 DHA. However, fish stocks across the planet are crashing, and farmed salmon, even if it is organic, is generally fed on meal comprised of unsustainably sources wild fish. It is also highly polluting, producing concentrated amounts of fish faeces and waste food which alter the marine biology, as well as spreading disease amongst wild fish. Producers of omega-3 supplements are increasingly turning to krill - small crustaceans found in all the world's oceans - and environmental campaigners are lobbying to protect this resource at the base of the marine food chain. Pasture-fed meat is, in contrast, highly sustainable and, crucially, presents omega-3 in a balanced ratio with omega-6 fatty acids.

High-nitrogen fertilizers are prized by golf courses not just for establishing luminous billiard-table greens but as the surest way of eradicating bothersome earthworms whose casts can get in the way of a putt.

Nitrates are also lost from the soil in the form of gas. Under waterlogged or saturated soil conditions some bacteria transform nitrate fertilizer into nitrous oxide, a greenhouse gas, each molecule of which is almost 300 times more powerful than carbon dioxide in its greenhouse warming effect. Nitrogen is lost from the soil as ammonia gas, too, which is produced from the volatilization of urea, the preferred fertilizer of many farmers. The cost to the world, from the effect on people's lungs to the depletion of the ozone layer, from dead zones in coastal seas to polluted drinking water and damaged soils, is astronomical. According to the European Nitrogen Assessment published in 2011, pollution cause dby nitrogen-based compounds cost the European Union EUR70-320 billion a year. The bill for the whole world could top EUR1 trillion.

During the period 1940-1991, potatoes had lost 47 per cent of their copper, 45 per cent of their iron and 35 per cent of their calcium, while the declines for carrots were greater still. Broccoli, considered a superfood rich in micronutrients and antioxidants, suffered an 80 per cent drop in copper, with the calcium content a quarter of what it was in 1940. The same was true for tomatoes. We would have needed to eat ten or more tomatoes in 1991 to receive the same amount of copper as we would have derived from one tomato in 1940. Yet another study calculated we have to eat eight oranges today to receive the same amount of vitamin A as our grandparents did from eating one. 

So it was with a deeper appreciation for earthworms that we celebrated their return to work at Knepp. In these mysterious, deaf, blind, spineless, toothless creatures we have another - and perhaps our most crucial - keystone species, one that can bring about changes at the microscopic level that utterly transform life above ground.

Amazingly, the world's soils hold more carbon as organic matter than all the vegetation on the planet, including rainforest. 82 per cent of the carbon in the terrestrial biosphere - that is, the part of the earth's land surface including the adjacent atmosphere where life exists - is in the soil.
#soil #compost 

They estimate that if organic matter in the world's farmed soils was increased by as little as 1.6 per cent, the problem of climate change would be solved.

Over a period of fifty years, the report estimated, Knepp Wildland will have stored an additional £14 million worth of carbon.

The great concerns of our time - climate change, natural resources, food production, water control and conservation, and human health - all boil down to the condition of the soil. It seems that we are, at last, beginning to reappraise the essential medium of earth's biology, that thin, living skin. We are starting to appreciate its potential for doing many of the things that we thought, arrogantly, we could do on our own. By returning to the soil we are beginning, after centuries of exploitation and technological hubris, to seek an understanding of how our species can survive in the world not just for the next few decades but for the thousands of years to come, how we can combine our creative intelligence and expertise with systems that have benefited, unlike us, from millions of years of R and D.

For Harvard biologist E. O. Wilson the human connection with nature - something he calls 'biophilia' , the 'rich, natural pleasure that comes from being surrounded by living organisms' - is rooted in our evolution. We have been hunter-gatherers for 99 per cent of our genetic history, totally and intimately involved with the natural world. For a million years our survival depended on our ability to read the weather, the stars and the species around us, to navigate, empathize and cooperate with out environment. The need to relate to the landscape and to other forms of life - whether one considers this urge aesthetic, emotional, intellectual, cognitive or even spiritual - is in out genes. Sever that connection and we are floating in a world where our deepest sense of ourselves is lost.
Stephen and Rachel Kaplan take the psychological implications of this dislocation further. Their research, begun in the 1980s, focuses on the burden that living outside the natural world imposes on the brain. Modern life, loaded with stimuli, multiple forms of communication and information requiring rapid processing and selection, demands what they call 'directed attention' from the right frontal cortex of the brain - the same part of the brain that appears to be affected in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. This kind of focused attention is tiring and requires enormous effort to block out distractions, resulting in symptoms of impatience, planning impairment, indecision and irritability. The natural environment, on the other hand, holds our attention indirectly, providing what the Kaplans call 'soft fascination', a broad absorption that demands little or no effort and provides plenty of space for reflection and mental recovery. Their studies showed that even comparatively effortless pastimes like listening to music or watching TV are not as effective as nature at clearing the mind and recovering the powers of direct attention.
#adhd

But making the moral case for protecting nature for its own sake, because it is beautiful and important and we have no right to destroy it - the case campaigners have been making for a half a century or more - has demonstrably failed. When nature is valued at nothing, when it is invisible in the economic system by which we live, that system invariably tosses it aside.

Ours was the worst kind of nimbyism. Like most farmers we considered ourselves stewards of the land while, deep down, we felt that nature was not farming business. Nature was something that happened elsewhere, away from the hard-nosed economics of agriculture.

In the complex web of an ecosystem, the humblest creature may have an exponential impact. Often we can't tell which is a keystone species until it's gone. Mounting evidence, however, suggests that the system that is best at delivering multiple ecosystems services is also the most complex and biologically diverse. Indeed biodiversity itself might be a proxy measure for ecosystems services.
#systems-thinking #complexity #nature 

