#terry-pratchett 

Only in our dreams are we free. The rest of the time we need wages.
#work #dreams #freedom

Witches never curtsey.
#witches #feminism

I daresay we'll all feel better for a cup of tea, said Nanny Ogg, mouthing the words like a mantra.
#tea

Magic glues the discworld together - magic generated by the turning of the world itself, maging would like silk out of the underlying structure of existence to suture the wounds of reality.
#magic #construction-of-reality 

Unlike wizards, who like nothing better than a complicated hierarchy, witches don't go in much for the structured approach to career progression. It's up to eahc individual witch to take on a girl to hand the area over to when she dies. Witches are not by nature gregarious, at least with other witches, and they certainly don't have leaders.
#power 

All that ghosts had were thoughts

"If I'd had to buy you, you wouldn't be worth the price." Granny

Particles of raw inspiration sleet through the universe all the time. Every once in a while one of them hits a receptive mind, which then invents DNA or the flute sonata form or a way of making light bulbs wear out in half the time. But most of them miss. Most people go through their lives without being hit by even one. Some people are even more unfortunate. They get them *all*. 
#inspiration 

Ninety per cent of true love is acute, ear-burning embarassment. #love

Destiny was funny stuff, he knew. You couldn't trust it. Often you couldn't even see it. Just when you knew you had it cornered, it turned out to be something else - coincidence, maybe, or providence. You barred the door against it, and it was standing behind you. Then just when you thought you had or nailed down it walked away with the hammer. #destiny 

Granny had never had much time for words. They were so insubstantial. Now she wished that she had found the time. Words were indeed insubstantial. They were as soft as water, but they were also as powerful as water and now they were rushing over the audience, eroding the levees of veracity, and carrying away the past.
#truth #linguistics 
